Add custom validator tutoral (#5881)
operator-framework/operator-sdk: website/content/en/docs/advanced-topics/custom-bundle-validation.md

---
title: Custom Bundle Validation
weight: 80
---

## Summary

> Operator Authors can now use "external" validators with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Operator authors can now use "external" validators with the
```

`operator-sdk bundle validate` command by using the

> `--alpha-select-external` flag. This feature enable Operator authors,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`--alpha-select-external` flag. This feature enables Operator authors,
```

users, and registry pipelines to use custom validators.

## Usage

External validators can be used by specifying a list of local filepaths to
executables using colons as path separators:

```sh

> operator-sdk bundle validate --alpha-select-external path/validator1:path/validator2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ operator-sdk bundle validate --alpha-select-external \
path/validator1:path/validator2
```
Not sure if you want to include the terminal prompt to specify that only user privelages are required. And I am not sure if you break long CLI commands for readability. If so, be sure the other CLI commands for consistency.

```

## Writing a Custom Validator

For a validator to work with `operator-sdk bundle validate` each of the files must:
1. Be executable with appropriate permissions
1. Return JSON to STDOUT in the [ManifestResult][manifest_result] format.

### Custom Validator from Scratch

Using the `errors` package from `operator-framework/api`, we can start
by validating the correct number of arguments and marshaling a
`ManifestResult` into STDOUT.

```go
package main

import (
	"encoding/json"
	"fmt"
	"os"

	"github.com/operator-framework/api/pkg/validation/errors"
)

func main() {

	// we expect a single argument which is the bundle root.
	// usage: validator-poc <bundle root>
	if len(os.Args) < 2 {
		fmt.Printf("usage: %s <bundle root>\n", os.Args[0])
		os.Exit(1)
	}

	var validatorErrors []errors.Error
	var validatorWarnings []errors.Error
	result := errors.ManifestResult{
		Name:     "Always Green Example",
		Errors:   validatorErrors,
		Warnings: validatorWarnings,
	}
	prettyJSON, err := json.MarshalIndent(result, "", "    ")
	if err != nil {
		fmt.Println("Invalid json")
		os.Exit(1)
	}
	fmt.Printf("%s\n", string(prettyJSON))
}
```

> These custom validators can be written in any language. When executed on

Reviewer: Would it make sense to move the sentence, "These custom validators can be written in any language" up to the _Writing Custom Validators_ section that introduces the topic? It feels like you are burying the lede here and this should be emphasized.

> its own, this validator prints a json representation of ManifestResult.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
its own, this validator prints a JSON representation of `ManifestResult`.
```

```sh

> go build main.go && ./main

Reviewer 2: might be able to just do `go run main.go`

{
    "Name": "Always Green Example",
    "Errors": null,
    "Warnings": null
}
```

> As long as the STDOUT follows the ManifestResult spec, it can be used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As long as the STDOUT follows the `ManifestResult` spec, it can be used
```

> with `operator-sdk bundle validate` command.

Reviewer 2: +1

```sh
go build main.go && operator-sdk bundle validate ./bundle --alpha-select-external ./main

INFO[0000] All validation tests have completed successfully 
```

From here, custom validator authors can read in the bundle and make any
assertions necessary.

Errors and Warnings are both implementations of the `error` interface
and need `ErrorType`, `Level`, `Field`, `BadValue`, and `Detail`, which

> are all initialized by arbitrary strings.

Reviewer 2: Good explanation. I don't think I thought about even calling that out. Nice!

```go
validatorErrors = []errors.Error{errors.Error{"someErrorType", "somelevel", "somefield", "somebadvalue", "somedetail"}}
validatorWarnings = []errors.Error{errors.Error{"someWarningType", "somelevel", "somefield", "somebadvalue", "somedetail"}}
```

We can now rebuild and run the validator, which now shows errors. 
```sh
go build main.go && operator-sdk bundle validate ./bundle --alpha-select-external ./main

WARN[0000] somelevel: Field somefield, Value somebadvalue: somedetail 
ERRO[0000] somelevel: Field somefield, Value somebadvalue: somedetail 
```

### Composing Validators

> For users wishing to validate using `operator-framework/api` of a
> different version than what is built into the `operator-sdk` binary, it
> is possible to import the `validation` package from the `api` repository
> at an arbirary version. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also validate using a different version of the `operator-framework/api` 
than what is built into the `operator-sdk` binary. You can 
import the `validation` package from the `api` repository
at an arbitrary version. 
```
Typo correction and a suggestion to break up the long sentence.

Reviewer: Would it help the user to have direct links to the repos and packages in this sentence?

Using the `errors` package from [`operator-framework/api`][of-api], we
can start by validating the correct number of arguments and marshaling a
[`ManifestResult`][manifest_result] into STDOUT.

```go
package main

import (
	"encoding/json"
	"fmt"
	"os"

	"github.com/operator-framework/api/pkg/validation/errors"
)

func main() {

	// we expect a single argument which is the bundle root.
	// usage: validator-poc <bundle root>
	if len(os.Args) < 2 {
		fmt.Printf("usage: %s <bundle root>\n", os.Args[0])
		os.Exit(1)
	}

	var validatorErrors []errors.Error
	var validatorWarnings []errors.Error
	result := errors.ManifestResult{
		Name:     "Always Green Example",
		Errors:   validatorErrors,
		Warnings: validatorWarnings,
	}
	prettyJSON, err := json.MarshalIndent(result, "", "    ")
	if err != nil {
		fmt.Println("Invalid json")
		os.Exit(1)
	}
	fmt.Printf("%s\n", string(prettyJSON))
}
```

When executed on its own, this validator prints a JSON representation of
[`ManifestResult`][manifest_result].

```sh
go build main.go && ./main

{
    "Name": "Always Green Example",
    "Errors": null,
    "Warnings": null
}
```

As long as the STDOUT follows the ManifestResult spec, it can be used

> with `operator-sdk bundle validate` command.

Reviewer 3: Should we reiterate this point here? It is already specified that this is a requirement here: https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk/pull/5881/files#diff-921c84e16a264fb65ea7d53da616dbe82e6f180cfa75bf4e5f55244f61dfef7cR28

Author: good point, removed

are all initialized by arbitrary strings. When using Golang, validator
authors can use the [operator-framework/api][of-api] impementation of
[errors and warnings][errors-pkg]

```go
validatorErrors = []errors.Error{errors.Error{"someErrorType", "somelevel", "somefield", "somebadvalue", "somedetail"}}
validatorWarnings = []errors.Error{errors.Error{"someWarningType", "somelevel", "somefield", "somebadvalue", "somedetail"}}
```

We can now rebuild and run the validator, which now shows errors.

```sh
$ go build main.go && operator-sdk bundle validate ./bundle --alpha-select-external ./main
```
```
WARN[0000] somelevel: Field somefield, Value somebadvalue: somedetail
ERRO[0000] somelevel: Field somefield, Value somebadvalue: somedetail
```

### Composing Validators

For users wishing to use validators from
[`operator-framework/api`][of-api] without being restricted to the
version that is built into the `operator-sdk` binary, it is possible to
create a `main.go` that makes use of the [`validation`
package][of-validation] at an arbitrary version.

Currently, some of the code necessary requires copying code from
internal packages, which may someday become a library.

> 

Reviewer: Since the code that follows is more of an example config file, not something a user is editing or a command to run, would it make sense to add a title to the config? Something like: **Example `main.go` file**.

		prettyJSON, err := json.MarshalIndent(result, "", "    ")
		if err != nil {
			// should output JSON so that the call knows how to parse it
			fmt.Printf("XXX ERROR: %v\n", err)
		}
		fmt.Printf("%s\n", string(prettyJSON))
	}
}

// getBundleDataFromDir returns the bundle object and associated metadata from dir, if any.
func getBundleDataFromDir(dir string) (*apimanifests.Bundle, string, error) {
	// Gather bundle metadata.
	metadata, _, err := FindBundleMetadata(dir)
	if err != nil {
		return nil, "", err
	}
	manifestsDirName, hasLabel := metadata.GetManifestsDir()
	if !hasLabel {
		manifestsDirName = registrybundle.ManifestsDir
	}
	manifestsDir := filepath.Join(dir, manifestsDirName)
	// Detect mediaType.
	mediaType, err := registrybundle.GetMediaType(manifestsDir)
	if err != nil {
		return nil, "", err
	}
	// Read the bundle.
	bundle, err := apimanifests.GetBundleFromDir(manifestsDir)
	if err != nil {
		return nil, "", err
	}
	return bundle, mediaType, nil
}

// -------------------------------------------------------
// Everything below this line was copied code from the internal Operator SDK
// registry package operator-sdk/internal/registry/labels.go. If this is

> // generally userful please file an issue to move this to a reuable library.

Reviewer 3: Typos:
```suggestion
// generally useful please file an issue to move this to a reusable library.
```

	}

	return annotations, annotationsPath, nil
}

// readAnnotations reads annotations from file(s) in bundleRoot and returns them as Labels.
func readAnnotations(fs afero.Fs, annotationsPath string) (Labels, error) {
	// The annotations file is well-defined.
	b, err := afero.ReadFile(fs, annotationsPath)
	if err != nil {
		return nil, err
	}

	// Use the arbitrarily-labelled bundle representation of the annotations file
	// for forwards and backwards compatibility.
	annotations := registrybundle.AnnotationMetadata{
		Annotations: make(Labels),
	}
	if err = yaml.Unmarshal(b, &annotations); err != nil {
		return nil, fmt.Errorf("error unmarshalling potential bundle metadata %s: %v", annotationsPath, err)
	}

	return annotations.Annotations, nil
}
```

The `main.go` is then built into a binary and used with `operator-sdk bundle
validate`

```sh
$ go build -o myvalidator/main myvalidator/main.go
$ operator-sdk bundle validate ./bundle --alpha-select-external ./myvalidator/main
```
```
WARN[0000] Warning: Value sandbox-op.v0.0.1: owned CRD "sandboxes.sandbox.example.come" has an empty description
INFO[0000] All validation tests have completed successfully
```

> [errors-pkg]: https://github.com/operator-framework/api/pkg/validation/errors

Reviewer 4: Link seems to be broken.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[errors-pkg]: https://github.com/operator-framework/api/tree/master/pkg/validation/errors
```

Reviewer 5: Yes, not able to access the errors-pkg link. Rest Looks good to me.

Author: I blindly used the pkg import from go rather than the actual human link :/ Fixed!

## Summary

Operator authors can now use "external" validators with the
`operator-sdk bundle validate` command by using the
`--alpha-select-external` flag. This feature enables Operator authors,
users, and registry pipelines to use custom validators. These custom
validators can be written in any language. 

## Usage

External validators can be used by specifying a list of local filepaths to
executables using colons as path separators:

```sh

> $ operator-sdk bundle validate --alpha-select-external \ 
> path/validator1:path/validator2

Reviewer 3: Should we move the flag down with the flag arguments for better readability?

Something like:
```suggestion
$ operator-sdk bundle validate \ 
--alpha-select-external path/validator1:path/validator2
```

		}
		return nil
	})

> 	if err != nil {todoapi

Reviewer 3: Remove this
```suggestion
	if err != nil {
```
